I got a call from the captain of the ship. He wanted
to see me. I was just getting ready to go to bed. Been
up for probably 18 hours.
I walked up to his office, and he showed me a long
teletype news release that had gone, had been
released. Now, there were lots of reporters
aboard our ship, okay? I don't have any idea how
many. but all kinds of reporters aboard our ship.
And they were able to send out over teletype news
releases, as they should have been. But he asked
me, he says, did you talk to this guy? Did you say
this? And I said, well, let me read it and see what it
is first. I said, first of all, I hadn't talked to
anybody. I read it, and Here was a news release
telling about what I had done that day, how I had
gone into Vietnam, what I had done, and so on and so
forth. Biggest bunch of crap you have ever laid
your eyes on. Here's what we surmised had
happened. There is a bulletin board on the ship
that has the plan of the day, and it has a command
roster on there. And I was the senior Marine aboard
this ship.
And I was CO of troops. My battalion was aboard.
There was two and a half helicopter squadrons
aboard. But I was a senior Marine. And so this guy,
wanting to get a story, assumed that I had gone
ashore. The battalion that actually did the work
had gone, off of another ship he was not aboard my
ship this guy took my name and blt19 was what i
commanded at that time and he simply wrote a story
out
purely out of his own head now if he had not been
stupid he would have known that i had not gone
ashore
What I'm saying is these young reporters
made their money. That was their job. I mean, they
didn't, a lot of them, didn't get paid unless they
had so many column inches or so many minutes of
video time.
When I was in Vietnam proper the first time, Most of
the time, we weren't bothered with reporters too
much, because we were really doing the mundane
thing. And who wants to hear about the
type thing that we were doing? But when we got to Khe
Sanh, that was another matter. Boy, they used to
fly in there on anything that they could get a ride
on. And they'd get off of one of those airplanes,
and they'd grab the first guy they could find,
hopefully, to see a responsible person. And they
wanted your name, your organization, but that
really is about all they wanted, because they
wrote the rest of their story on crap.
They already had their minds made up what they were
going to write about, and that's how you get So much
of the stuff that I said, you know, you would think
that we would have found 300 people in our barbed
wire every morning because of the assaults on the
base. And it just didn't happen. Well, who wants to
write about they spent their night in their bunker
being shelled by artillery and rockets all night?
That doesn't read very well. And as a result of
that, they didn't want to write it. But the media
was terrible. I can't emphasize that enough.
They'd get in your way. They wanted to be in places
where they shouldn't be.
I kind of like the way General Schwarzkopf handled
them in Desert Storm.
And I realize that that might sound as though
there's a conflict in believing that we have the
right to do all these things and then we're going to
restrict. I do not think that there should be
censors per se. There should be available at some
point all the information so that history can be
correct. But there should not be information that
would allow, well, the latest is over in Somalia,
allow the press to be waiting when the Marines
land. Now, as it turned out, that didn't hurt
anything. But it could have. It could have created
all sorts of things. And my position is this. Why
should I place my Marines in added danger just so
some jerk can write a column, can be the first one to
get some information back to a newspaper? Now,
does it matter whether that news was shown on
today's 6 o'clock news or day after tomorrow? Not
one iota.
What is important is that it be truthful if and when
it does get to the news. Not when it gets there, but
that it is the truth when it gets there. I suppose
handling the media has got to rank almost equal in
importance to your fire support plan. And that's
terrible. A commander should not have to worry
about newspaper people.
He should be able to concentrate on saving the
lives of his people. That should be his most
important mission. And it's not anymore. And
that's terrible. And I won't forgive him for that.
From some of the things that you've indicated, I
think you feel that a lot of people misunderstand
Vietnam. No doubt about it. What would you like for
future generations to understand about Vietnam?
Well, that's
a pretty broad question. I would like for people to
understand that a large number of Americans
went to a country that they didn't understand.
They
went there because the commander in chief sent
them there.
And that probably 99% of them did a tremendous job.
And they
were as brave as any other American fighting force
has ever been. They
did this without the support back home that all
other wars had had. And that includes Corita, too.
Basically, our people in Korea were supported
back home.
That it was predominantly a guerrilla war, one of
which really US forces are not well suited for in
the way of organization, equipment, so on and so
forth.
And that they did their duty as they saw it.
I don't think that the vast majority of us have any
reason to believe that we have to share the blame,
the responsibility for the few like the My Lai
Massacre and so forth. Those were criminal acts
done by criminals.
And I don't think the United States Army, for
instance, should feel as though there's a special
responsibility or a
black mark on them for this. This was done by an
inept criminal. And they finally did try and so
forth. But what would I want the people to believe?
That young men did
a tough, dirty job.
It's always the young men that really pay the
ultimate price. I was 36 years old. when I was there
the first time. I wasn't a kid.
It's the young 18, 19, 20 year old man that pays the
price. But I think it's part of that wall I alluded
to before.
They stand as a part of what we are as people.
And they have every reason to be proud of it. And we
have stood up against what we thought was wrong,
generally referred to as communism for the last 50
years.
The things that we've done has not necessarily
been popular and it has never been pleasant.
And the brunt of that has always been on the
shoulder of the young men. But that's what makes us
a great nation.
And I think, if you'll allow,
people often
get the wrong idea when they think of and talk about
freedom.
Maybe the word itself lends itself to that.
Because it starts off with free and leads a lot of
people to think that it didn't cost anything.
That's not true.
It cost a lot.
And you know who it cost? The young man, the young
soldier, the young sailor, the young Marine.
The air effort, which I don't have any firsthand
knowledge of, of course, in this war, probably is
different from any other. in that almost all of our
prisoners of war were aviators, were pilots. In
other wars, with the exception of the early part of
the European war, aviators were fairly safe. And
large numbers were not taken prisoners and so
forth. And we haven't touched on that, but you
know, I think the people who paid the greatest
price of all were our prisoners of war.
And almost all of those were officers, and almost
all of them were eight years.
I have a great deal of respect for them, for what
they had to go through.
If you allow me to just go back a bit to the media,
what the media has done to the families of what we
now still show is missing in action is absolutely
criminal.
Absolutely criminal. They go over and they get
pictures and so on and so forth and they get little
bits and pieces and then go back and prey on the
families of these guys who have long since been
dead.
It is absolutely criminal.
I cannot fathom any
responsible military officer who ever would have
had any kind of intelligence information about us
having live people over there that would have ever
been quiet about it or not taken appropriate
action. And I cannot fathom our politicians And by
that, I mean our presidents, the two presidents
that were involved in this
ever making any kind of behind the scene deal that
would have left, you know, X number of our
prisoners over there for peace. I mean, I reject
that outright. First of all, he can't do it in the
vacuum. There would have been lots of Not lots, but
there would have been enough military people in on
that sort of thing. And I have enough pride in them.
They'd
have never stood still for it.
But the media, and this is a small part of the media.
are going to suck this thing for as long as they can
make money on it. And if you think that there's any
other motivation behind what they're doing than
money, then you're crazy as a bed bug. It is
money-oriented. And it's making these people
suffer again and again and again. They've
suffered enough. Leave them alone. Anyway. Is
there anything that I haven't asked you about that
you just want to talk about?
Well, I alluded to the prisoners.
The suffering that they went through is
almost unimaginable. If you haven't read some of
the books that some of these guys have written, you
should do so. Because there were some real heroes.
And I suspect that
for most of us, Whatever effect that the Vietnam
War had on us has probably dissipated to the point
to where it's just one of those things that
happened in our earlier life. But I don't think
it's done this with the prisoners yet.
I suspect that they're still paying for a lot of
that. I guess the only other thing that I would say
is that there was an awful lot written and there was
a lot of people got on the so-called bandwagon
about the post-trauma syndrome that a lot of the
Vietnamese veterans suffered from. I don't know.
There was a time when I thought that entire thing
was a bunch of bunk. And
I truly felt that most of the people that was
claiming that was just doing so for a free ride. But
I guess the reason I arrived at that conclusion is
that at one point there was about 550,000 men over
there. But out of that 550,000 men that was in
Vietnam, Only about 100,000 are what you would
actually call combat troops. The rest of them were
eating three hot meals a day out of a mess hall, were
sleeping in either a tent that had
been specially prepared with wooden decks and so
on and so forth, that were going to px's and clubs
and going to movies every night so the vast
majority of the experiences about four-fifths of
the stories that you would get would be totally
different from what i told you because it was from
the you know work eight or ten hours a day and then
sleep the rest of the time in reasonable safety
Every now and then, the Viet Cong would come around
and would throw a few mortar rounds in some of these
big bases. Some of the big bases down around Saigon
had swimming pools, Olympic-sized swimming
pools.
Now, I don't put any credence whatsoever
to the experience that the four-fifths of the
people involved in that sort of thing have The
young soldier who was in the combat unit
probably worked as hard and endured as much
hardship as 90% of them ever did in other wars. So to
that group of people, I truly take my hat off. To the
four-fifths, and they're the ones that do the most
talking, and tell the most exaggerated stories
about Vietnam, I say, it's a bunch of garbage. I
have sat and listened to these stories in the past.
And finally, you know, just saying, oh, by the way,
what outfit were you with when you were in Vietnam?
And in almost every case, It would be some
headquarters guy that got three hot meals a day and
slept between sheets.
So I don't put any stop for it whatsoever. I can tell
you this, and this is all that I know for sure, all
the other something that I've been told. But I know
for a fact that the people of the 2nd Battalion 26
Marines in the seven months that I was there did not
have one single solitary day off. Not one.
They were up patrolling or doing something until
we got to Quezon when we just sat there all day long
on patrol or ambush or something all night long.
Probably did not average more than three or four
hours sleep.
Now,
I don't know what kind of effect, long-term
effect, that had on them.
Probably not good. I finally did come to the
conclusion that some of that's real. But the vast
majority of it's not. The vast majority of it is
not.
I appreciate this so much.